\documentclass{llncs}

\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{cmll}
\usepackage{stmaryrd}
\usepackage{todonotes}
\usepackage{mathpartir}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\usepackage[barr]{xy}

% Commands that are useful for writing about type theory and programming language design.
%% \newcommand{\case}[4]{\text{case}\ #1\ \text{of}\ #2\text{.}#3\text{,}#2\text{.}#4}
\newcommand{\interp}[1]{\llbracket #1 \rrbracket}
\newcommand{\normto}[0]{\rightsquigarrow^{!}}
\newcommand{\join}[0]{\downarrow}
\newcommand{\redto}[0]{\rightsquigarrow}
\newcommand{\nat}[0]{\mathbb{N}}
\newcommand{\fun}[2]{\lambda #1.#2}
\newcommand{\CRI}[0]{\text{CR-Norm}}
\newcommand{\CRII}[0]{\text{CR-Pres}}
\newcommand{\CRIII}[0]{\text{CR-Prog}}
\newcommand{\subexp}[0]{\sqsubseteq}
%% Must include \usepackage{mathrsfs} for this to work.
\newcommand{\powerset}[0]{\mathscr{P}}

\date{}

% Cat commands.
\newcommand{\cat}[1]{\mathcal{#1}}
\newcommand{\catop}[1]{\cat{#1}^{\mathsf{op}}}
\newcommand{\Hom}[3]{\mathsf{Hom}_{\cat{#1}}(#2,#3)}
\newcommand{\limp}[0]{\multimap}
\newcommand{\dial}[0]{\mathsf{Dial_2}(\mathsf{Sets})}
\newcommand{\dialSets}[1]{\mathsf{Dial_{#1}}(\mathsf{Sets})}
\newcommand{\dcSets}[1]{\mathsf{DC_{#1}}(\mathsf{Sets})}
\newcommand{\sets}[0]{\mathsf{Sets}}
\newcommand{\obj}[1]{\mathsf{Obj}(#1)}
\newcommand{\mor}[1]{\mathsf{Mor(#1)}}
\newcommand{\id}[0]{\mathsf{id}}
\newcommand{\lett}[0]{\mathsf{let}\,}
\newcommand{\inn}[0]{\,\mathsf{in}\,}
\newcommand{\cur}[1]{\mathsf{cur}(#1)}
\newcommand{\curi}[1]{\mathsf{cur}^{-1}(#1)}

\newenvironment{changemargin}[2]{%
  \begin{list}{}{%
    \setlength{\topsep}{0pt}%
    \setlength{\leftmargin}{#1}%
    \setlength{\rightmargin}{#2}%
    \setlength{\listparindent}{\parindent}%
    \setlength{\itemindent}{\parindent}%
    \setlength{\parsep}{\parskip}%
  }%
  \item[]}{\end{list}}

%% Ott
\input{atrees-ott}

\begin{document}

\title{Proposing a New Foundation of Attack Trees in Monoidal Categories}

\author{Harley Eades III}
\institute{Computer and Information Sciences, Augusta University, Augusta, GA, \email{heades@augusta.edu}}

\maketitle 

\begin{abstract}
  TODO
\end{abstract}

\section{Introduction}
\label{sec:introduction}

What do propositional logic, multisets, directed acyclic graphs,
source sink graphs, Petri nets, and Markov processes all have in
common?  They are all mathematical models of attack trees \cite{??},
but even more than that, they can all be modeled in some form of a
symmetric monoidal category\footnote{We provide a proof that the
  category of source sink graphs is monoidal in
  Appendix~\ref{sec:source_sink_graphs_are_symmetric_monoidal}.}
\cite{?} -- for the definition of a symmetric monoidal category see
Appendix~\ref{sec:symmetric_monoidal_categories}.  Taking things a
little bit further, monoidal categories have a tight correspondence
with linear logic through the beautiful Curry-Howard-Lambek
correspondence \cite{?}.  This correspondence states that objects of a
monoidal category correspond to the formulas of linear logic and the
morphisms correspond to proofs of valid sequents of the logic.  I
propose that attack trees -- in many different flavors -- be modeled
as objects in monoidal categories, and hence, as formulas of linear
logic.

The Curry-Howard-Lambek correspondence is a three way relationship:
\begin{center}
  \setlength{\tabcolsep}{7pt}
  \begin{tabular}{ccccc}
    Categories & $\iff$ & Logic    & $\iff$   & Functional Programming\\
    Objects    & $\iff$ & Formulas & $\iff$   & Types    \\
    Morphisms  & $\iff$ & Proofs   & $\iff$   & Programs 
  \end{tabular}
\end{center}
By modeling attack trees in monoidal categories we obtain a sound
mathematical model, a logic for reasoning about attack trees, and the
means of constructing a functional programming language for defining
attack trees (as types), and constructing semantically valid
transformations (as programs) of attack trees.

Linear logic was first proposed by Girard \cite{?} and was quickly
realized to be a theory of resources.  In linear logic, every
hypothesis must be used exactly once.  Thus, formulas like $A \otimes
A$ and $A$ are not logically equivalent -- here $\otimes$ is linear
conjunction.  This resource perspective of linear logic has been very
fruitful in computer science.  It has lead to linear logic as being a
logical foundation of concurrency \cite{?} where formulas may be
considered as processes.  This perspective fits modeling attack trees
perfectly, because they essentially correspond to concurrent
processes.

Girard's genius behind linear logic was that he isolated the
structural rules -- weakening and contraction -- by treating them as
an effect and putting them inside a comonad called the of-course
exponential denoted $!A$.  In fact, $!A \otimes !A$ is logically
equivalent to $!A$, and thus, by staying in the comonad we become
propositional.  This implies that a modal of attack trees in linear
logic also provides a model of attack trees in propositional logic,
and a combination of the two.  It is possible to have the best of both
worlds.

In this short paper I introduce a newly funded research
project\footnote{This material is based upon work supported by the
  National Science Foundation CRII CISE Research Initiation grant,
  ``CRII:SHF: A New Foundation for Attack Trees Based on Monoidal
  Categories``, under Grant No. 1565557.}  investigating founding
attack trees in monoidal categories, and through the
Curry-Howard-Lambek correspondence deriving a new domain-specific
functional programming language called Lina for Linear Threat
Analysis.  We begin by defining the style of attack trees we will
study here in Section~\ref{sec:attack_trees}, then we give a semantics
of attack trees in a model of full intuitionistic linear logic in
Section~\ref{sec:concrete_semantics_of_attack_trees_in_dialectica_spaces},
we discuss how the semantics may be further abstracted in
Section~\ref{sec:abstract_semantics_of_attack_trees_in_monoidal_categories},
and finally, we discuss the design of Lina in
Section~\ref{sec:lina:_a_domain_specific_pl_for_threat_analysis}.
% section introduction (end)

\section{Attack Trees}
\label{sec:attack_trees}
In this paper I consider an extension of attack trees with sequential
composition which are due to Jhawar et al. \cite{Jhawar:2015}, but one
of our ultimate goals is to extend attack trees with even more
operators driven by are choice of semantics.  The syntax for attack
trees is defined in the following definition.
\begin{definition}
  \label{def:atrees}
  The following defines the syntax of \textbf{Attack Trees} given a set
  of base attacks $b \in \mathsf{B}$:
  \[
  \begin{array}{lll}
    t ::= [[b]] \mid [[t1 + t2]] \mid [[t1 (+) t2]] \mid [[t1;t2]] \mid [[t1 (x) t2]] \mid [[! t ]]\\
  \end{array}
  \]
  We denote parallel composition by $[[t1 + t2]]$, choice between
  attacks $[[t1]]$ and $[[t2]]$ by $[[t1 (+) t2]]$, sequential
  composition of attacks by $[[t1;t2]]$, a new operator called
  orthocurrence by $[[t1 (x) t2]]$, and finally a new operator called
  copy by $[[! t]]$.
\end{definition}
The syntax given in the previous definition differs from the syntax
used by Jhawar et al. \cite{Jhawar:2015}.  First, I use infix binary
operations, while they use prefix $n$-ary operations. However, it does
not sacrifice any expressivity, because as we will see in the next
section each operation is associative, and parallel composition,
choice, and orthocurrence are symmetric.  Thus, we can embed Jhawar et
al.'s definition of attack trees into the ones defined here.  The hard
part of this embedding is realizing that the $n$-ary version of
sequential composition can be modeled by the binary version, but if we
have $\mathsf{SAND}(t_1,t_2,\ldots,t_n)$, then it is understood that
$t_1$ is executed, then $t_2$, and so on until $t_n$ is executed, but
this is exactly the same as $t_1;t_2;\cdots;t_n$.

The second major difference is that I denote parallel composition with
an operator that implies we can think of it as a disjunction, but
Jhawar et al. and others in the literature seem to use an operator
that implies that we can think of it as a conjunction.  The semantics,
however, tells us that it is really a disjunction.  The parallel
operation defined on source sink graphs defined by Jhawar et
al. \cite{Jhawar:2015} can be proven to be a coproduct -- see
Appendix~\ref{sec:source_sink_graphs_are_symmetric_monoidal} -- and
coproducts categorically model disjunctions.  Furthermore, parallel
composition is modeled by multiset union in the multiset semantics,
but we can model this as a coproduct.  Lastly, the semantics I give in
the next section models parallel composition as a coproduct.  Thus, I
claim that an operator that reflects this is for the better.

The third difference is that I denote the choice between executing
attack $[[t1]]$ or attack $[[t2]]$, but not both, by $[[t1 (+) t2]]$
instead of using a symbol that implies that it is a disjunction.  This
fits very nicely with the semantics of Jhawar et al., where they
collect the attacks that can be executed into a set.  The semantics I
given in the next section models choice directly.

The forth, and final, difference is that we extend the syntax with two
new operators called orthocurrence and copy.  The attack $[[t1 (x)
    t2]]$ states that $[[t1]]$ interacts with the attack $[[t2]]$ in
the sense that processes interact.  Modeling interacting attacks
allows for the more refined modeling of security critical systems.
For example, one could take over a workstation on a network and funnel
malicious traffic through it onto the internal network.  Orthocurrence
stems from process algebra, and for more examples, and a brief history
of orthocurrence see \cite{Pratt:2001}.  In fact, this operator points
out a theme to the project being described in this paper.  We view
attack trees as describing concurrent interacting processes.  Thus, we
can learn a lot from process algebra.

Orthocurrence actually hints at an interesting extension of attack
trees with interacting parties.  For example, it can be used to bring
social engineering into the analysis where someone communicates
malicious information or commands to a unsuspecting party.  That is,
attack trees could be extended with nodes representing people or
devices communicating information from/through one process to another.

The attack $[[! t]]$ indicates that attack $[[t]]$ can be copied and
contracted.  For example, $[[! (t (x) t)]]$ is equivalent to $[[!
    t]]$.  Thus, the attack trees given here can treat attack trees as
processes/resources that cannot be freely copied and deleted, but also
as propositions that can be, but even further, these two perspectives
can be mixed.  Semantically, $[[! t]]$ is equivalent to the of-course
exponential from linear logic mentioned in the introduction.
% section attack_trees (end)

\section{Concrete Semantics of Attack Trees in Dialectica Spaces}
\label{sec:concrete_semantics_of_attack_trees_in_dialectica_spaces}

I now introduce a new semantics of attack trees that connects their
study with two new perspectives that could highly impact future
research in attack trees: intuitionistic linear logic and process
calculi.  Note that every construction and proof given in this section
with the exception of sequential composition has been formalized in
the proof assistant Agda\footnote{The complete formalization can be
  found at \url{https://github.com/heades/dialectica-spaces} which is
  part of a general library for working with dialectica spaces in Agda
  developed with Valeria de Paiva.}.  The semantics is based on the
notion of a dialectica space:

\begin{definition}
  \label{def:dialectica-space}
  A \textbf{dialectica space} is a triple $(A, Q, \delta)$ where $A$
  and $Q$ are sets and $\delta : A \times Q \to \mathsf{2}$ is a
  relation.
\end{definition}
Dialectica spaces can be seen as the intuitionistic cousin
\cite{dePaiva:2006b} of Chu spaces \cite{Pratt:1999}.  The latter have
be used extensively to study process algebra and as a model of
classical linear logic, while dialectica spaces and their morphisms
form a model of full intuitionistic linear logic \cite{?}. I will use
the intuitions often used when explaining Chu spaces to explain
dialectica spaces, but it should be known that these intuitions are
due to Pratt and Gupta \cite{?}.  However, the dialectica space
construction of choice and sequential composition is novel, but is
equivalent to the constructions in Chu spaces \cite{?}, and so is the
application of this semantics to attack trees.

Intuitively, we can think of a dialectica space, $(A , Q, \delta)$, as
a process where $A$ is the set of actions the process will execute,
$Q$ is the set of states the process can enter, and for $a \in A$ and
$q \in Q$, $\delta(a , q)$ indicates whether action $a$ can be
executed in state $q$.  However, this process intuition will not be
highly necessary for the task at hand which is showing that attack
trees can be modeled using dialectica spaces.

Dialectica spaces form the objects of a category called $\dial$.  This
category has an abundance of structure.  The definition $\dial$
requires the notion of a morphism between dialectica spaces.
\begin{definition}
  \label{def:dial-space-morphism}
  A \textbf{dialectica-space morphism} between dialectica spaces
  \\ $(A , Q, \alpha)$ and $(B , R , \beta)$ is a tuple $(f, F)$ where
  $f : A \to B$ and $F : R \to Q$ such that the following weak
  adjointness condition holds:
  \begin{center}
    for any $a \in A$ and $r \in R$, if $\alpha(a,F(r))$, then
    $\beta(f(a), r)$. 
  \end{center}
\end{definition}
Proving that we have a category takes a little bit of work, but all
the details can be found in the formal development.  The category
$\dial$ forms one of the earliest models of linear logic, and is the
first model of intuitionistic linear logic that contains every linear
operator. It is originally due to de Paiva \cite{?}. For more
information on how it relates to linear logic see \cite{Eades:2016}.

The interpretation of attack trees into dialectica spaces requires the
construction of each operation on dialectica spaces:

\begin{changemargin}{5pt}{5pt}\noindent
\textbf{Parallel Composition.} Suppose $\cat{A} = (A , Q, \alpha)$ and
$\cat{B} = (B , R , \beta)$ are two dialectica spaces.  Then we can
construct the dialectica space $\cat{A} + \cat{B} = (A + B, Q \times
R, \alpha + \beta)$ where $A + B$ is the disjoint union of $A$ and
$B$, and $\alpha + \beta : (A + B) \times (Q \times R) \to \mathsf{2}$
is defined by $(\alpha + \beta)(i , x) = \alpha(i , x)$ if $i \in A$,
but $(\alpha + \beta)(i , x) = \beta(i , x)$ if $i \in B$.  Thus, from
a process perspective we can see that $\cat{A} + \cat{B}$ executes
either an action of $\cat{A}$ or an action of $\cat{B}$, but also
potentially both, however this requires $\cat{A} + \cat{B}$ be a
coproduct.  It turns out that we can show that parallel composition is
a coproduct, the details can be found in the formal development.
Thus, it is associative and symmetric.
\end{changemargin}

\begin{changemargin}{5pt}{5pt}\noindent
\textbf{Choice.} Suppose $\cat{A} = (A , Q, \alpha)$ and $\cat{B} = (B
, R , \beta)$ are two dialectica spaces.  Then we can construct the
dialectica space $\cat{A} \sqcup \cat{B} = (A + B, Q + R, \alpha
\sqcup \beta)$ where $\alpha \sqcup \beta : (A + B) \times (Q + R) \to
\mathsf{2}$ is defined by $(\alpha \sqcup \beta)(i , j) = \alpha(i ,
j)$ if $i \in A$ and $j \in Q$, $(\alpha + \beta)(i , j) = \beta(i ,
j)$ if $i \in B$ and $j \in R$, otherwise $(\alpha + \beta)(i , j) =
0$.  Thus, from a process perspective we can see that $\cat{A} \sqcup
\cat{B}$ executes either an action of $\cat{A}$ or an action of
$\cat{B}$, but not both.  Since the actions and states of $\cat{A}
\sqcup \cat{B}$ are disjoint unions it is pretty easy to show that
choice forms a symmetric monoidal operator, and hence, is symmetric
and associative, but it is not a coproduct, because it is not possible
to define the corresponding injections.
\end{changemargin}



% section concrete_semantics_of_attack_trees_in_dialectica_spaces (end)

\section{Abstract Semantics of Attack Trees in Monoidal Categories}
\label{sec:abstract_semantics_of_attack_trees_in_monoidal_categories}

% section abstract_semantics_of_attack_trees_in_monoidal_categories (end)

\section{Lina: A Domain Specific PL for Threat Analysis}
\label{sec:lina:_a_domain_specific_pl_for_threat_analysis}

% section lina:_a_domain_specific_pl_for_threat_analysis (end)

\section{Conclusion and Future Work}
\label{sec:conclusion_and_future_work}

% section conclusion_and_future_work (end)


\bibliographystyle{plain} \bibliography{ref}

\appendix

\section{Symmetric Monoidal Categories}
\label{sec:symmetric_monoidal_categories}
\input{appendix-SMC}
% section symmetric_monoidal_categories (end)

\section{Lineales}
\label{sec:lineales}

% section lineales (end)


\section{Source Sink Graphs are Symmetric Monoidal}
\label{sec:source_sink_graphs_are_symmetric_monoidal}

% section source_sink_graphs_are_symmetric_monoidal (end)


\end{document}

%%% Local Variables: 
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: t
%%% End: 

